So in our video on JavaScript, we introduced you to the concept of an object. And in this video, I want to talk about a very specific object that we can use to manipulate data and content on our web pages called the document object.

Now, you may recall from that discussion in the JavaScript video that objects contain two different things, basically. They contain something called properties or data. And they contain methods, which are functions that apply just to those objects. But what we didn't really get into a lot of detail was that those objects, what you can put in them is actually pretty flexible.

You can do a lot of different things with them. You can not only put data in there. You can also put other objects or arrays inside of it. And maybe those objects that you put inside of that bigger object also have other objects in them. So you can kind of create this nesting structure of objects within a single JavaScript object, which, if you think about it, thinking back to our discussion about C and trees, it kind of creates a tree structure where you have one object, inside of that there's another one, inside of those, there's other ones, and so on.

One very specific object in JavaScript is called the document object. And that is an object that basically organizes the entire content of a single web page into a single JavaScript object. And once you know the methods and properties of the document object, you can change them in JavaScript. You can assign the different properties to a value. You can call methods on the object to change some of those properties, which then allow you to manipulate the content or look and feel of your website only using JavaScript, instead of going back and editing your HTML or the Python that underlies it.

So here's an example of a very simple HTML website. There's really not much going on here. But as you can see, there's HTML tags. We have inside of that a head and a body. Inside of the head, we have a title, "Hello, world." Inside of the body, we have a couple of different tags there. We have an H2, or a second-level header tag, a paragraph tag, and a link. And all of this can actually be represented in JavaScript as a document object. We can actually arrange all of this hierarchically, sort of similar to what we're doing with the indentation, where clearly things that are indented one level further in are nested with inside of another-- nested inside of another part of the HTML.

So for example, here is what a tree structure of that simple web page we just looked at might be. So we have a document. And inside of that, we have HTML. And that's kind of represented by the HTML tag that we have. And everything inside of it is sort of nested below it, as you can see. Within our HTML, there are two main things at the next level down. There is the head and the body. So we can look specifically at the head. And we see that inside of the head, there is a title. And inside of the title, there is some text, "Hello, world." And we can also look at the body, which is an entirely different segment of the object or of the tree, inside of which is each of those three individual pieces, the h2, the p, and the a tag. And all of that can be represented sort of in a tree, which maps, as you can see, as I'm highlighting the text in green on the HTML, to a section of our HTML as well. So the document object has properties, just like any other object. And it has a number of methods as well. And if you, again-- and we're going to talk about this in just a moment-- know how to navigate through the document object, starting at the top and drilling down to the section of the page that you want, you can change what your site looks like.

So actually, let's go into the IDE and take a look at how you can see the document object yourself in the browser. OK. So we're in my IDE and I'm really quickly just going to show you that this is exactly the same HTML that we had just a moment ago on a slide. And I have page actually open in another tab here. And you'll also notice that I popped open my Developer Console. If you're using Google Chrome, you can usually do that with Control-Shift-J on a PC, or Command-Shift-J a Mac. And that just opens the JavaScript Console. And recall from our JavaScript video that we can use the Console using console.log, for instance, to print out information to the Console as we're going through our page.

Well, there's other things we can do with the Console as well. We can also type commands to it to have it do something. And so what I'm going to do this time is something a little bit different. Instead of typing console.log, I'm going to type console.dir. And what console.dir is going to do is it's going to basically try and organize the content of my page here in a directory structure, which basically is a fancy way of describing an object. So we can kind of look and see what's in the object. And what object do I want to look at? Well, I want to look at the document object, so I'm going to console.dir document. And when I hit Enter here, we're going to see that I got an undefined.

But above that I have this sort of pound sign document. That is the JavaScript Console returning to me the document object. When this pops open, there's going to be a lot of stuff in there. And a lot of it we're not going to really talk about. I just want to show you how things are nested in that document object. So I'm going to pop this open. And again, there's a lot of stuff here. But what I really want to take a look at is the children, so just looking at the children property of the document object. And you can see that there is one. If I pop that open, what do you see here? Inside of the document object, there is one child called HTML, which you might recall from our diagram a few slides ago. If I pop that open, you'll see that it also has children, two of them in fact, head and body. And I can continue doing this exercise all the way down.

But in fact, if I kept doing that and I looked inside of the head, I'd find the title tag. I could open that and see what's in there. Inside of the body I would find that there are three children, the h2, the p, and the a tag. All of them are nested inside of this big document object. And we can actually manipulate this object using JavaScript.