We have two kinds of loops in Python. So in C we had three. We had while loops, do while loops, and for loops. Here in Python, we don't have do while loops anymore. We only have the two, while and for, although they're a bit more flexible here. So here's an example of some C code where we're using a while loop. We initialize a counter to 0, and then so long as that counter is less than 100, we print out the number and then we increment the counter by 1. So this loop will run 100 times, printing the numbers 0 1 dot, dot, dot, dot, dot all the way down to 99. Do this same thing in Python, it would look a little something like this. Counter equals zero-- again, we're leaving off the type specifier because it's Python, we don't need it. There's no semicolons at the end. And then while counter is less than 100-- again, no extraneous parentheses here either. We're really trying to streamline what we can. Then we just print out the counter and we say, counter plus equals 1. This is another catch here in Python. Plus plus is not the increment by one operator. We have to very explicitly call out counter plus equals 1. We can't say counter plus plus. But otherwise, this would do exactly the same thing. Print out one line at a time the numbers 0 to 99. And notice also that we don't have to include that backslash n that we did in C when we were using printf. In Python, by default it assumes that if you're printing something, it's just going to tack a new line on at the very end for you automatically. So that's kind of nice. Here's a for loop that would do again pretty much exactly the same thing that we just saw. It initializes the variable x to 0, and then so long as x is less than 100 it will print out the number, and then at the end of every iteration of the loop it will execute the line x plus plus. So we'll again have 0 1 dot, dot, dot, dot, dot all the way down to 99. In Python it looks a little something like this. For x in range 1000 print x. So range is a function that will give us basically a list, and we'll talk about what that is in just a moment, of all the numbers from 0 to 100 but not including 100. So this would give us a list of 0 to 99. And then we're just going to print out every number in that list starting at the beginning, going all the way to the end. In a for loop where we wanted to count by twos we might do something like this. In Python we can also do that, we just have to add one extra parameter to our range function. We set a start point, we set with the endpoint, and we set how much we want to skip by. So this is a list of all of the integers from up to 100 but not counting 100, counting by twos. So this would generate a list for us of 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 and so on all the way up to 98.