OK. So let's talk about how to use the Linux command line. Now, the CS50 IDE, or in fact, even a CS50 appliance, if you're familiar with that, or you're taking an older version of CS50, is a cloud-based machine which runs Ubuntu, which is one of the many flavors of the Linux operating system. Linux operating system is favored by programmers, because it's just cooler, right? 

Many modern Linux distributions have graphical user interfaces, which we also call GUIs, G-U-I, to allow easy mouse-based navigation, which you're probably familiar with, if you're a Windows or Mac user, moving around your mouse, double-clicking on icons, and so on. Still though, as a programmer, and even though the IDE contains the ability to do some graphical user stuff, clicking, and dragging, and all that, you'll still be using your terminal window pretty frequently. And you can do many of the same tasks that you can do with a mouse with keyboard commands. And we're going to talk a little bit about what some of those commands are right now. 

Now, these commands can be used on any Unix-based operating system, which includes Linux, but also includes Mac OS. If you open up Terminal on your Mac, you can use these exact commands. Windows also has Command Prompt, but some of the commands are slightly different, so it doesn't actually work, because Windows is not a Unix-based system. 

So let's take a look at some of these Linux commands. The first one that you'll probably use quite a lot is ls. That's a lowercase l, followed by a lowercase s, which is short for list. And what the list command does is it gives you a readout of all the files and folders in your current directory. So you can see everything you can get to from where you currently are. 

So I've opened up here the CS50 IDE. And I'm going to zoom-in in a second to give you a closer look, but here's the broad picture of what the IDE looks like. On the left, you can see we have a file tree, which you're probably familiar with, double-clicking, and files and folders, and all that stuff. So that's still there in the CS50 appliance. At the center in the top is where you're going to be writing your code, once you click on a file. And at the bottom, we have a terminal window, which is where we can execute these terminal commands. 

I'm going to zoom-in and head over here, just to show you that, in fact, I can click on these files and folders. So clearly, where I currently am, I have two folders, called pset0 and pset1, and three files, one called hello, one called hello.c, and one called hello.txt. 

So let's move down to the terminal window and get a closer look. So we just talked, again, about the fact that we have three files and two folders in the current directory. If I type ls, which again is the command to list the contents of the current directory, and then I hit Enter, look what I see, hello, hello.c, hello.txt, pset0 and pset1. 

pset0 and pset1 are colored blue, to indicate to you that those are directories that we could navigate into. And we'll learn a little bit about how to navigate into directories in a minute. And every other thing is colored black, if it's a text file or a source code file, and green, if it's an executable file. So clearly, that means that I could run a program called, hello. That's what the green one there means. But basically, typing the ls command has allowed me to look at everything that exists in my current directory, which matches what we see here, in the graphical display of the same.