As we continue to put C in the rear view mirror behind us, I wanted to now introduce you to another programming language that we'll use a lot in CS50, Python. Now, of course we're not going to be able to cover Python in nearly as much depth as we spent in those 30 or so videos we spent talking about C in prior weeks, but the goal here is really to give you an introduction to the language so you can see some of the tools it has and figure out how you might want to use them best on your own. Now, Python is an example of a pretty commonly used modern programming language. It's probably in the top five or six at the time this video is being recorded. It's been around though for a while. It's been around for over 25 years, and it's really a great language choice for making some complex operations in C a lot easier. So you may recall working with C that string manipulation can be really challenging. And it also simplifies things like networking and really it's a general purpose utility language that you can use to do a lot of stuff. It's also very popular right now among data scientists for processing large sets of data and generating graphs, charts, and results from that. There is some good news too as well. So Python is pretty inspired by C as a lot of modern programming languages are honestly. And its syntax is going to look a little bit different, but it has some pretty consistent look and feel things to it. You're not going to see as many curly braces or anything like that that you didn't in C, but hopefully some of the style lessons that you learned along the way will come in handy for you here. To start writing a Python file it's pretty straightforward. All you've got to do is open up a file with the dot py file extension inside of CS50 IDE. That will automatically syntax highlight it for you and show you that what you're typing is proper valid Python or not. But unlike C, Python is not a compiled language. Or it is not necessarily a compiled language. Python programs can be run in a Python interpreter. This is similar to PHP if you're familiar with that language as well where you can just write your lines of code and have the computer just run through them one by one executing as you go. Python programs can work in exactly the same way. One really important caveat before we dive into this. In CS50, we teach Python 3. There are actually two pretty popular versions of Python, Python 2 and Python 3. So all the syntax and everything we're going to talk about in this video is Python 3 specific, and in general, if you're looking up documentation on your own trying to figure out how to use a Python function or figure out if there's a Python function that does something you're looking to do, be sure to include Python 3 in your search instead of just saying Python, because you might get Python 2 results which would not necessarily work. So let's go through some of the basic things that we can do in C and show you how we can do them in Python.