The conditional statements from C are all available for you to use, but they might look a teeny bit different now. So whereas in C we might say something like this, if y is less than 43, or z equals equals 15, and then we have some code. That's not what it looks like in Python. It looks a little something like this. If y is less than 43 or literally using the word or now, not using two vertical bars, because in Python we can do that. Or z equals 15 colon, instead of open curly brace and then whatever code we have close curly brace and then some code below. In Python, all comments are introduced with the pound sign or hash mark like this. So this basically just indicates that this is a comment. So here's an if else statement that might be familiar with from C. In Python, it's going to look pretty similar. Again, it looks just like this where we now-- well actually, we have and here. So previously in C we have if y is less than 43 and z is equal to 15. In Python, just like where or was translated from two vertical bars to the word or, in Python we've translated two ampersands to the word and. So we don't have to use two ampersands anymore, we can just literally say the word and. Then we have the else there. The else is not that big of a difference. This one is a little bit different though. So if course number equals 50 we do one thing. Else if course number is not equal to 51 we do something else. In Python, we don't have else if, we have elif, not elseif. But otherwise it's going to behave exactly the same. So just again, trying to cut a couple of characters out of what we have to type. And again, instead of using course num not equal to 51, we can do elif not course num equals 51. Again, it's a little bit of a twist, but we can again use these English words. We're not having to use the exclamation point symbol, the vertical bar symbol, the ampersand, all that sort of taking away that junk and we can just start to speak English almost in Python. And that's actually one of the reasons that people find this language popular is because generally, if you think you want to write something in English, you're actually pretty much on the way to writing it the same thing in Python. As I pointed out, we don't have else if, it's just one word here, elif. Just like before though, we end our lines now with colons and we indent our code blocks. And as we'll see a bit later, indenting in Python is super, super, super important. We also have question mark colon, the ternary operator. It looks a little bit different. I'm going to show it here just you see it, but generally it's a little bit weird so you might not use it all that frequently. So here what we're doing is we're getting a character in C, and then if that character is a letter, alphabetic gets assigned to the value true, otherwise it gets assigned to the value false. Here, that line would look like this. It's a single line of code, and we have our true and false. Notice that they are now capitalized as opposed to in C where they're lower case. Again, these little syntax differences are the kinds of things that when you're learning a new language, these are the things that will vary a little bit from language to language. But it's the general concepts here that we're concerned with and these will become second nature to you pretty quickly if you use Python for more than a week or so. We have this function called input, which we can use. It's native to Python. And we can use that to collect user input at the command line, just like we did in CS50's library with get char, get float, get int, and so on. Although those functions, again, are also available for you to use in Python. We rewrote them in Python for you.